It's important to note that
generative algorithms
are not new.
Previous generations of
language models made use of
an architecture called recurrent
neural networks or RNNs.
RNNs while powerful
for their time,
were limited by the
amount of compute and
memory needed to perform
well at generative tasks.
Let's look at an example
of an RNN carrying out
a simple next-word
prediction generative task.
With just one previous
words seen by the model,
the prediction
can't be very good.
As you scale the RNN
implementation to be able
to see more of the preceding
words in the text,
you have to significantly
scale the resources
that the model uses.
As for the prediction,
well, the model failed here.
Even though you scale the model,
it still hasn't seen enough of
the input to make
a good prediction.
To successfully
predict the next word,
models need to see more than
just the previous few words.
Models needs to have
an understanding of
the whole sentence or
even the whole document.
The problem here is that
language is complex.
In many languages, one word
can have multiple meanings.
These are homonyms.
In this case, it's only
with the context of
the sentence that we can see
what kind of bank is meant.
Words within a sentence
structures can be
ambiguous or have what we might
call syntactic ambiguity.
Take for example this sentence,
"The teacher taught the
students with the book."
Did the teacher teach using
the book or did the
student have the book,
or was it both?
How can an algorithm
make sense of
human language if
sometimes we can't?
Well in 2017, after the
publication of this paper,
Attention is All You Need,
from Google and the
University of Toronto,
everything changed.
The transformer
architecture had arrived.
This novel approach unlocked
the progress in generative
AI that we see today.
It can be scaled efficiently
to use multi-core GPUs,
it can parallel
process input data,
making use of much larger
training datasets,
and crucially,
it's able to learn
to pay attention
to the meaning of the
words it's processing.
And attention is all you
need. It's in the title.